In computing, what's the only way to generate a truly random string? ¦ Put a Windows user in front of VI and tell him to quit.
I just donated some money to the maintainers of a Linux distribution derived from Red Hat ¦ \*tips fedora\*
Hi. My name is Linus Torvalds and today I will be teaching you how to manage threads and resolve conflicts*. ¦ ^*In ^Linux ^development ^mailing ^lists.
I switched from Windows to Linux today... ¦ I feel Libreated.
Apparently red hat came out and said that there were no more Linux kernels in development, that they have gone in every direction. ¦ Apparently there's nothing GNU under the sun.
How did the Linux admin commit assault? ¦ He sudo bashed someone.
You go in for an interview for a Linux programming job... ¦ ...and you are asked for an example of your linux programming abilities, so you type into the terminal "sudo apt-get JOB"
Have you heard there's a new disease you can get from using Linux? ¦ It's Terminal.
What were the favorite Linux text editors of 8 randomly selected Monty Python fans? ¦ vim, vim, vim, vim, vim, vim, emacs, and vim.
What do Karl Marx and the founder of Linux have in common? ¦ Both of them hate classes.
Why do Linux admins always take Xanax? ¦ Because they're constantly battling their daemons.
So a network specialist comes up to me and says "do you wanna here a joke?" ¦ There was a Linux error
Disappointed that there will be no Call of Cthulhu client for Linux ¦ I wanted to go insane installing *and* playing the game.
What's a neckbeards favorite linux os? ¦ Fedora
I think Debian Linux.... ¦ .... has a very `apt` package manager.
Why do prostitutes use Linux? ¦ It's open to the public
How would you know if someone uses Linux-GNU? ¦ Don't worry, they will tell you
Met a guy once who rapped about nothing but Linux systems ¦ His name was 50CentOS
The box said 'Requires Windows 10 or better'. ¦ So I installed LINUX
The boss was shouting at the co-worker at tor not knowing how to use Linux ¦ I asked him to stop, bashing much won't help either..
What did the Linux admin say to his racoon friend? ¦ I am root.
What killed the Linux user? ¦ A terminal disease.
How does a Linux user evolve Bonsly? ¦ sudo woodo
When God closes a window, ¦ he opens a Linux
I have a Linux joke... ¦ But some of you would not apt-get it.
Who Has The Highest Rank in the Linux Military? ¦ The kernel.
Why do people on the iss use linux ¦ You can't open windows in space
What is a Linux user's favourite beverage. ¦ Root beer.
How do you copy in Linux? ¦ You press Ctrl and C at t- \^C Process aborted with exit 0
Why can't you eliminate Satan from Linux? ¦ Because 666 isn't executable.
What do you call Linux' bodyguards with no balls? ¦ Unix
How do you get the most recent posts in r/linux? ¦ Sort by **GNU**.
What do you call a group of Linux users? ¦ *Club Penguin.*
How to make Gnu/Linux run Photoshop? ¦ You serve it WINE.
Why programmers like unix? ¦ unzip, strip, touch, finger, grep, mount, fsck, more, yes, fsck, fsck, fsck, umount, sleep....
