No number from 1 to 999 includes the letter "a" in its word form.
Many oranges are actually green.
The opposite sides of a die will always add up to seven.
You are 13.8 percent more likely to die on your birthday.
Playing dance music can help ward off mosquitoes.
The King of Hearts is the only king in a deck of cards without a mustache.
Medical research has found substances in mistletoe that can slow down tumor growth.
Paper money is not made from wood pulp but from cotton. This means that it will not disintegrate as fast if it is put in the laundry.
Contrary to popular belief, hair does not grow back darker and thicker after it has been shaved.
When you walk down a steep hill, the pressure on your knees is equal to three times your body weight.
The leading cause of poisoning for children under the age of six in the home is liquid dish soap.
40% of all indigestion remedies sold in the world are bought by Americans.
In 21 U.S. states, WALMART is the single largest employer.
Deep Breathing gives you health benefits similar to aerobics.
A company in Taiwan makes dinnerware out of wheat, so you can eat your plate.
Contrary to popular belief, putting sugar in a car's gas tank will NOT ruin its engine.
Tablecloths were originally meant to be served as towels with which dinner guests could wipe their hands and faces after eating!
The volume of the Earth's moon is the same as the volume of the Pacific Ocean.
The world?s youngest parents were 8 and 9 and lived in China in 1910.
Almost all varieties of breakfast cereals are made of grass.
Tipping at a restaurant in Iceland is considered an insult.
It takes 492 seconds for sunlight to reach the Earth!
The Canary Islands were not named after a bird called the canary. They were named after a breed of dogs!
Sound at the right vibration can bore holes through a solid object.
Leonardo da Vinci invented scissors.
In 39 of the 50 U.S. states, the travel industry is the largest single employer.
Albert Einstien never wore any socks.
Connecticut and Rhode Island never ratified the 18th Amendment (Prohibition).
There have been over 7,200 acts of terrorism against the US over the last 15 years.
Billy goats urinate on their own heads to smell more attractive to females.
Business.com is currently the most expensive domain name sold for $7.5 million.
The first product that Sony came out with was the rice cooker.
Half of all identity thieves are either relatives, friends, or neighbors of their victims.
A 'jiffy' is an actual unit of time for 1/100th of a second!
At 120 miles per hour, a Formula One car generates so much downforce that it can drive upside down on the roof of a tunnel.
On average, it takes 660 days from conception for an elephant to give birth.
Among older men, vanilla is the most erotic smell.
In older people, memory is best early in the morning and then declines during the late afternoon.
It takes about a week to make a jelly bean.
Most lipstick contains fish scales.
When glass breaks, the cracks move faster than 3,000 miles per hour.
The number of births that occur in India each year is higher than the entire population of Australia.
Seaweed can grow up to 12 inches per day!
Jericho is the oldest walled city in the world at 9,000 yrs old!
In a year approximately 900 million trees are cut down to make the raw materials needed for American pulp mills and paper.
There are over 58 million dogs in the U.S!
In Albania, nodding your head means 'no' and shaking your head means 'yes'.
The average life span of a major league baseball is 5-7 pitches!
Donkeys are commonly used by the Iraqi Military to launch rockets!
A blue whale's heart is the size of a Volkswagen Beetle!
